# Observables

Observable is the core data type of Reactive Programming. An Observable is just a function, with a few special characteristics.  In Reactive programming, observer subscribes to an **Observable**. Then that observer reacts to whatever item or sequence of items the Observable emits. So we can turn an array, promise, or iterable into an observable.


Here are a couple of ways one can create an Observable:
* create an Observable from scratch
```javascript
import { Observable } from 'rxjs';

const obs$ = new Observable(observer => {
    setTimeout(() => {
        observer.next('Notification!');
    }, 1000)
});

obs$.subscribe(n => console.log(n)); // Will be called in 1s
```
* turn a promise into an Observable

```javascript
import { from } from 'rxjs';

const promise = new Promise(res => {
    setTimeout(() => {
        res('Notification!');
    }, 1000)
});

from(promise).subscribe(n => console.log(n)); // Will be called in 1s
```
* turn any value into an Observable

```javascript
import { of } from 'rxjs';

of(null).subscribe(n => console.log(n)); // null
```

* or use a framework that does it for you behind the scenes, such as Angular.


Such as [HttpClient](https://angular.io/guide/http) service's request methods, that always return observable;

# Observable types
## Subject
> A Subject is a special type of Observable 
> that allows values to be multicasted to many 
> Observers. Subjects are like EventEmitters.

In some case you do not need to create observer as it is. If you need to emit observable outside observable - you can create Subject, that will help you to notify other parts of program from any part of your code using subject variable and method ``` subject$.next(<value>) ``` to pass data.

```javascript
const cartDataComing$ = new Subject();

cartDataComing.next('book');
cartDataComing.next('candy');
cartDataComing.next('magazine');

cartDataComing.complete();
```

To avoid users using method ``` next``` you can just return subject as observable using such method of Subject object as ``` carDataComing$.asObservable() ```

## BehaviorSubject

>A variant of Subject that requires an initial value and emits its current value whenever it is subscribed to.

If you need observable with default data casts to every subscriber - you should use ``` BehaviorSubject```

```javascript
const cart = {
    items: []
};

const cart$ = new BehaviorSubject(cart);

cartDataComing.next({
    items: [...cart.items, `<new item>`]
});
```

This kind of observable will notify observer with default empty array of items on the first subscription.

After late subscription subscriber will be notified with the latest ```BehaviorSubject``` value

```javascript
const cart = {
    items: []
};

const cart$ = new BehaviorSubject(cart);

cart$.subscribe(val => console.log(val.items)); // ['<new item>']
```

## AsyncSubject

> A variant of Subject that only emits a value when it completes. It will emit its latest value to all its observers on completion.

```javascript
const cart$ = new AsyncSubject();

cart$.next(`<new item>`);
cart$.next(`<new item> 2`);
cart$.next(`<new item> 3`);

car$.subscribe(console.log) // <new item> 3
```

## ReplaySubject

>A variant of Subject that "replays" or emits old values to new subscribers. It buffers a set number of values and will emit those values immediately to any new subscribers in addition to emitting new values to existing subscribers.

If you need to make some manipulations with every value that was emitted - ```ReplaySubject`` is your choice!

```javascript
const cart$ = new ReplaySubject();

cart$.next(`<new item>`);
cart$.next(`<new item> 2`);
cart$.next(`<new item> 3`);

car$.subscribe(console.log) // <new item> <new item> 2 <new item> 3
```